Chapter 7: 
Deployment And Testing On 

Cloud Platform 

Semester 1 2025/2026

By 

Assoc. Prof. Ts. Dr. Novia Admodisastro

Software Engineering & Information System Department

FSKTM, UPM



Topic Outline

• Customer-managed vs Cloud-managed

• Load Balancing

• Monitoring and Capacity Provisioning

• Auto-Scaling

• Cloud Testing



Section 1: Customer-managed vs Cloud-
managed
Chapter 7: Deployment And Testing On Cloud Platform



Unmanaged versus managed services

Unmanaged: Managed:

Scaling, fault tolerance, and Scaling, fault tolerance, and 
availability are managed by availability are typically built 

you. into the service.

4



Unmanaged versus managed services
Unmanaged Managed
• Unmanaged services are typically • Managed services require the 

provisioned in discrete portions as user to configure them. 
specified by the user.

• However, managed services 
• User must manage how the service typically require less 

responds to changes in load, errors, configuration. 
and situations where resources 

• Ex., user create an Amazon 
become unavailable. Simple Storage Service (Amazon 

• Ex., launching a web server on an S3) bucket and then set 
Amazon Elastic Computer Cloud (EC2) permissions for it. 
instance. Because Amazon EC2 is an • Host a static website host in a 
unmanaged solution, that web server cloud-based storage solution, 
will not scale to handle increased Amazon S3. 

traffic load or replace unhealthy • The static website does not have 
a web server.

instances with healthy ones unless you 
• However, because Amazon S3 is 

specify that it use a scaling solution, a managed solution, features
such as AWS Automatic Scaling. such as scaling, fault-tolerance, 

and availability would be handled 
• The benefit to using an unmanaged automatically and internally by 

service is that user have more fine- Amazon S3. 
tuned control over how user solution 
handles changes in load, errors, and 
situations where resources become 

5
unavailable.



Scenario: Amazon Relational Database Service (RDS)
Challenges of relational databases
• Server maintenance and energy 

footprint

• Software installation and patches

• Database backups and high availability

• Limits on scalability

• Data security

• Operating system (OS) installation and 
patches

6



Amazon RDS

Managed service that sets up and operates a relational database in 
the cloud.

AWS Cloud

Users Application
Servers Amazon RDS

7



From on-premises databases to Amazon RDS

Database in Amazon Elastic 
Database in Amazon RDS 

On-premises database Compute Cloud (Amazon 
or Amazon Aurora

EC2) 

Application optimization Application optimization Application optimization
Scaling Scaling Scaling
High Availability High Availability High Availability
Database backups Database backups Database backups
Database software Database software Database software 
patches patches AWS patches
Database software Database software provides Database software 
installs installs installs
Operation system Operation system Operation system 
patches patches patches
Operating system install AWS Operating system install Operating system install
Server maintenance Server maintenance

provides Server maintenance
Rack and stack servers Rack and stack servers Rack and stack servers
Power, HVAC, network Power, HVAC, network Power, HVAC, network

8



Managed services responsibilities

You manage:

• Application optimization

AWS manages:

• OS installation and patches

• Database software installation and patches

• Database backups

• High availability Amazon RDS
• Scaling

• Power and racking and stacking servers

• Server maintenance

9



The right tool for the right job

What are my requirements?

Enterprise-class relational database Amazon RDS

Fast and flexible NoSQL database service for any scale Amazon DynamoDB

Operating system access or application features that Databases on Amazon 
are not supported by AWS database services EC2

Specific case-driven requirements (machine learning, AWS purpose-built 
data warehouse, graphs) database services

10



Quiz 1
Which of the following is a fully-managed NoSQL database service?

Choice Response

A Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS)

B Amazon DynamoDB

C Amazon Aurora

D Amazon Redshift

11



Section 2: Load Balancing
Chapter 7: Deployment And Testing On Cloud Platform



Elastic Load Balancing
• Modern high-traffic websites 

must serve hundreds of 
thousands—if not millions—of 
concurrent requests from users 
or clients, and then return the 
correct text, images, video, or 
application data in a fast and Elastic Load

reliable manner. Additional Balancing

servers are generally required to 
meet these high volumes.

IP addresses
• Distributes incoming application 

Containers
or network traffic across multiple EC2 instances Lambda functions

targets in a single Availability 
Zone or across multiple 
Availability Zones.

• Scales your load balancer as 
traffic to your application 
changes over time. 13



Types of load balancers

14



Elastic Load Balancing use cases

Highly available and Containerized Elasticity 
fault-tolerant applications and scalability
applications

Virtual private Hybrid environments Invoke Lambda 
cloud (VPC) functions over HTTP(S)

15



How Amazon Elastic Load Balancing works

• With Application Load 
Balancers and Network 
Load Balancers, you register 
targets in target groups, and AWS Cloud
route traffic to the target Load balancer accepts 

incoming traffic 
groups. Availability Zone A Availability Zone B

from clients.

• With Classic Load Balancers, 
you register instances with 
the load balancer. Listener checks for 

Listener connection requests. Listener

Load balancer routes
Load balancer traffic only to 
performs health  . healthy targets.  .  .  .
checks to Target TXarget Target Target Target
monitor health of 
registered 
targets.

16



Activity: Elastic Load Balancing

You must support traffic to a containerized 
application.

You have extremely spiky and unpredictable 
TCP traffic.

You need simple load balancing with multiple 
protocols.

You need to support a static or Elastic IP 
address, or an IP target outside a VPC.

You need a load balancer that can handle 
millions of requests per second while 
maintaining low latencies.

You must support HTTPS requests.

17



AWS Load balancer monitoring

• Amazon CloudWatch metrics – Used to 
verify that the system is performing as 
expected and creates an alarm to initiate 
an action if a metric goes outside an 
acceptable range.

• Access logs – Capture detailed 
information about requests sent to your 
load balancer.

• AWS CloudTrail logs – Capture the who, 
what, when, and where of API interactions 
in AWS services. 

18



High availability

• System can withstand some measure of degradation while still 
remaining available.

• Downtime is minimized.

• Minimal human intervention is required.

19



Availability tiers

20



Factors that influence availability

Fault tolerance Recoverability

• The built-in redundancy of an • The process, policies, and 
application's components and procedures that are related to 
its ability to remain restoring service after a 
operational. catastrophic event.

Scalability

• The ability of an application 
to accommodate increases in 
capacity needs without 
changing design.

21



Section 3: Monitoring
Chapter 7: Deployment And Testing On Cloud Platform



Monitoring Resources

To use cloud resources efficiently, cloud consumers need insight 
into the Cloud resources:

• How do you know when you should launch more Amazon EC2 
instances?

• Is your application's performance or availability being 
affected by a lack of sufficient capacity?

• How much of your infrastructure is actually being used?

How do you capture this information?

23



Amazon CloudWatch Amazon
CloudWatch

• Amazon CloudWatch is a • Monitors –
monitoring and • AWS resources 
observability service that • Applications that run on AWS
is built for DevOps • Collects and tracks –
engineers, developers, site • Standard metrics
reliability engineers (SRE), • Custom metrics
and IT managers. 

• Alarms –
• CloudWatch monitors 

• Send notifications to an 
AWS resources (and the Amazon SNS topic
applications that run on • Perform Amazon EC2 Auto 
AWS) in real time. Scaling or Amazon EC2 actions

• Use CloudWatch to collect • Events –
and track metrics, which 

• Define rules to match changes 
are variables that can in AWS environment and route 
measure for cloud these events to one or more 
resources and target functions or streams for 

applications. processing

24



Create an alarm based on a static 
CloudWatch alarms threshold, choose a CloudWatch metric for 

the alarm to watch and the threshold for 
• Create alarms based on – that metric. 

• Static threshold The alarm goes to ALARM state when the 
• Anomaly detection metric breaches the threshold for a 

• Metric math expression specified number of evaluation periods. 

• Specify –
• Namespace e.g., AWS/EC2
• Metric e.g., CPU Utilisation
• Statistic e.g., average, sum, 

minimum, maximum, sample 
count, a predefined percentile, 
or a custom percentile

• Period e.g., 5 mins
• Conditions e.g., Greater, 

Greater or Equal, Lower or 
Equal, or Lower than the 
threshold value

• Additional configuration
• Actions e.g., notification to an 

Amazon SNS topic, or to 
perform an Amazon EC2 Auto 
Scaling action or Amazon EC2 
action. 25



Activity: Amazon CloudWatch

If average CPU utilization is > 60% for 5 
minutes…

Amazon EC2

If the number of simultaneous connections 
is > 10 for 1 minute…

Amazon RDS

If the maximum bucket size in bytes is 
around 3 for 1 day…

Amazon S3

If the number of healthy hosts is < 5 for 10 
minutes…

Elastic Load Balancing

If the volume of read operations is > 1,000 
for 10 seconds…

Amazon Elastic 
Block Store

26



Section 4: Auto Scaling
Chapter 7: Deployment And Testing On Cloud Platform



Why is scaling important?

Unused Over

capacity capacity

Su    M     T     W     Th     F     Sa Su    M     T     W     Th     F     Sa

Used capacity Provisioned capacity
(demand)

28



Why is scaling important?

• Scaling is the ability to increase or decrease the compute capacity of 
your application. 

• To understand why scaling is important, consider this example of a 
workload that has varying resource requirements. In this example, the most 
resource capacity is required on Wednesday, and the least resource 
capacity is required on Sunday. 

• One option is to allocate more than enough capacity so you can always 
meet your highest demand—in this case, Wednesday. However, this 
situation means that you are running resources that will be underutilized 
most days of the week. With this option, your costs are not optimized.

• Another option is to allocate less capacity to reduce costs. This situation 
means that you are under capacity on certain days. If you don't solve your 
capacity problem, your application could underperform or potentially even 
become unavailable for users. 

29



Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling Amazon EC2 
Auto Scaling

• Helps you maintain application 
availability

• Enables you to automatically 
add or remove EC2 instances 
according to conditions that you 
define

• Detects impaired EC2 instances 
and unhealthy applications, and 
replaces the instances without 
your intervention

• Provides several scaling options:
Su    M     T     W     Th     F     Sa • Manual, 

• Scheduled, 
Used capacity Provisioned capacity • Dynamic or on-demand
(demand) • Predictive

• Dynamic scaling and predictive
scaling can be used together to 
scale faster.

30



(1) Automatic scaling is also useful for dynamic on-demand 
scaling. 

November traffic to Amazon.com

Provisioned capacity 76 percent

The challenge is to efficiently guess 
the unknown quantity of how much 

compute capacity you need.

24 percent
November

Amazon.com experiences a seasonal peak in traffic in November (on Black Friday and Cyber Monday, which 
are days at the end of November when US retailers hold major sales). If Amazon provisions a fixed capacity to 
accommodate the highest use, 76 percent of the resources are idle for most of the year. Capacity scaling is 
necessary to support the fluctuating demands for service. Without scaling, the servers could crash due to 
saturation, and the business would lose customer confidence. 31



Typical weekly traffic at Amazon.com

Provisioned capacity

Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday

(2) Automatic scaling is useful for predictable workloads

32



Auto Scaling groups

• An Auto Scaling group is a 
collection of EC2 instances 

Auto Scaling group
that are treated as a logical 
grouping for the purposes 
of automatic scaling and 
management.

Minimum size Launch or terminate • The size of an Auto Scaling 
instances as needed

group depends on the 
Desired capacity number of instances you set 

as the desired capacity. 
Maximum size • The size can be adjusted to 

meet demand, either 
For example, this Auto Scaling group has a minimum size manually or by using 
of one instance, a desired capacity of two instances, and 
a maximum size of four instances. automatic scaling. 
The scaling policies defined adjust the number of 
instances within the minimum and maximum number of 
instances, based on the criteria that were specified. 33



Scaling out versus scaling in

Elastic Load 
Balancing

Auto Scaling group Auto Scaling group Auto Scaling group

Base configuration Scale out Scale in
(launch instances) (terminate instances)

34



AWS Auto Scaling

• AWS Auto Scaling is a separate 
service from Amazon EC2 Auto 
Scaling.

• Monitors your applications and 
automatically adjusts capacity to 
maintain steady, predictable 
performance at the lowest 
possible cost

AWS Auto Scaling
• Provides a simple, powerful user 

interface that enables you to build 
scaling plans for resources, 
including –
• Amazon EC2 instances and Spot 

If you are already using Fleets
Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling to • Amazon Elastic Container Service 
dynamically scale your EC2 (Amazon ECS) Tasks 
instances, you can now use • Amazon DynamoDB tables and 
it with AWS Auto Scaling to indexes
scale additional resources • Amazon Aurora Replicas

for other AWS services.
35



How Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling works

What Where When
VPC Maintain current number

Private subnet • Health checks
AMI

Auto Scaling group Manual scaling
EC2 instance • Min, max, desired capacity

Launch Scheduled scaling

configuration Auto Scaling group • Scheduled actions

• AMI • VPC and subnets
• Instance type • Load balancer Dynamic scaling

• IAM role • Scaling policies
• Security groups
• EBS volumes Predictive scaling

• AWS Auto Scaling

36



Implementing dynamic scaling

Elastic Load Balancing

Auto Scaling group

CPU 
utilization If average CPU 

utilization is 
> 60% for 5 
minutes…

Run Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling policy
Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling Amazon CloudWatch

Amazon CloudWatch, Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling, and Amazon ELB work well 
individually. 
Together can become more powerful and increase the control and flexibility over 
how your application handles customer demand. 37



The Architecture Implementing Dynamic Scaling

One common configuration for implementing dynamic scaling is to create a 
CloudWatch alarm that is based on performance information from your EC2 
instances or load balancer.

When a performance threshold is breached, a CloudWatch alarm triggers an 
automatic scaling event that either scales out or scales in EC2 instances in the 
Auto Scaling group. 

1. Create an Amazon CloudWatch alarm to monitor CPU utilization across the 
fleet of EC2 instances and run automatic scaling policies if the average CPU 
utilization across the fleet goes above 60 percent for 5 minutes.

2. Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling instantiates a new EC2 instance into your Auto 
Scaling group based on the launch configuration that you create. 

3. After the new instance is added, Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling makes a call to 
Amazon Elastic Load Balancing (ELB) to register the new EC2 instance in 
that Auto Scaling group. 

4. Amazon ELB then performs the required health checks and starts 
distributing traffic to that instance. ELB routes traffic between EC2 instances 
and feeds metrics to Amazon CloudWatch. 

38



Quiz 2
Which service would you use to send alerts based on Amazon 
CloudWatch alarms?

Choice Response

A Amazon Simple Notification Service

B AWS CloudTrail

C AWS Trusted Advisor

D Amazon Route 53

39



Section 5: Cloud Testing
Chapter 7: Deployment And Testing On Cloud Platform



Cloud Testing
• Cloud Testing refers to the testing of resources such as hardware, software, 

etc. that are available on demand. 

• Even the testing here can be viewed “as a service”. 

• For cloud offerings, it’s essential to make sure that the service (product) 
not only meets its functional requirements but also the non-functional 
requirements.

• With a range of applications in the cloud, it is now becoming essential to 
develop the Cloud Testing strategy – must align to and leverage all 
aspects of the Cloud. 

41



Benefits Of Cloud Testing

• Dynamic availability of testing environment: 
• The normal testing approach in any organization is to invest in the 

hardware/software infrastructure required for testing. 
• The environment supplied to the testing teams very rarely match a 

customer environment on account of rapidly changing requirements, 
as a result of which it is very challenging for the companies to keep it 
up. 

• Cloud is the only answer to this problem whereby, users can easily 
replicate a customer environment and find defects early in the cycle.

• Low cost: 
• Another angle to the previous point is that when companies invest in 

the infrastructure, the usual cause of it is many of their servers are not 
utilized all the time. 

• As a result, they may have to incur additional expenses on license 
renewal. 

• Transitioning to the cloud helps in this scenario as well, as users can 
commission appliances as and when they want, thereby saving huge 
costs for an organization.

42



Benefits Of Cloud Testing (cont.)

• Easily customizable: 
• With the use of cloud, it’s an easy task for organizations to emulate an 

end-user centric environment by customizing it as per the usage 
thereby, saving cost and time. 

• Test teams can easily perform load and performance testing scenarios 
in various permutations and combinations like – different OSes, 
browsers, configurations, etc.

• Scalability: 
• This is one of the most attractive features of the cloud whereby the 

computing resources can be increased or decreased wherever it is 
necessary. 

• This is widely used in situations where the business requirements keep 
altering frequently.

43



Cloud Testing Forms

• Testing of the whole cloud: The cloud is viewed as a whole 
entity based on its features and testing is carried out based on 
that.

• Testing within a cloud: This is the testing that is carried out 
inside the cloud by checking each of its internal features

• Testing across the clouds: Based on the specifications, here the 
testing is carried out on the different types of clouds-like public, 
private and hybrid clouds.

• SaaS testing in cloud: Functional and non-functional testing is 
performed based on requirements.

44



Cloud Testing Environments

• There are 3 types of Cloud Testing Environments:
• A private or public environment where the quality of applications 

deployed in them needs to be validated.
• A hybrid environment, where the quality of applications deployed in 

them needs to be validated.
• A test environment that is cloud-based, where the quality of 

applications deployed in the cloud needs to be validated.

45



Types Of Testing Performed In 
The Cloud

• Testing types includes, 
Functional Testing & Non-
functional Testing

• Functional Testing has to be 
performed to make sure that 
the offering provides the 
services that the user is 
paying for.

• Functional tests ensure that 
the business requirements are 
being met.

• Non-functional tests mainly 
focus on a application based 
tests ensuring that they meet 
the desired requirements.

46



Types Of Testing Performed In 
The Cloud

• Some of the functional tests:
• System Verification Testing: This ensures whether the various modules 

function correctly with one another, thus making sure that their 
behavior is as expected.

• Acceptance Testing: Here the cloud-based solution is handed over to 
the users to make sure it meets their expectations.

• Interoperability Testing: Any application must have the flexibility to 
work without any issues not only on different platforms but it must also 
work seamlessly when moving from cloud infrastructure to another.

47



Types Of Testing Performed 
In The Cloud (cont.)

• Non-functional tests include:
• #1) Availability Testing: The cloud supervisor/vendor has to make sure 

that the cloud is available round the clock. As there could be many 
mission-critical activities going on, the administrator has to make sure 
that there is no adverse impact to the consumers

• #2) Multi-Tenancy Testing: Here, multiple users use a cloud offering. 
Testing must be performed to ensure that there is sufficient security 
and access control of the data when multiple users are using a single 
instance.

• #3) Performance Testing: Verification of the response time needs to be 
done to ensure that everything is intact even when there is a lot of 
requests to be satisfied. The network latency is also one of the critical 
factors to evaluate performance.

Also, workload balancing needs to be done when there is a reduction 
in load, by decommissioning resources. Thus load and stress testing 
are done in the cloud offering to make sure applications are 
performing optimally with an increase/decrease in load and stress. 48



Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) 
attacks 

What is DDoS? 

DDoS

DDoS DDoS

© 2020, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its aff iliates. All rights reserved.

49



Types Of Testing Performed In The Cloud 
(cont.)

• #4) Security Testing: As everything is available anytime with Cloud, it’s 
essential to make sure that all user sensitive information has no 
unauthorized access and the privacy of users remains intact. When 
maintaining the applications in the cloud, user data integrity must also 
be verified.

• #5) Disaster Recovery Testing: As already stated in availability testing, 
the cloud has to be available at all times and if there are any kind of 
failures like network outages, breakdown due to extreme load, system 
failures, etc, measure how fast the failure is indicated and if any data 
loss occurs during this period.

• #6) Scalability Testing: Test to make sure that offering has the 
capability to provide scale up or scale down facilities as per the need.

50



Cloud Testing Tools

• Some of the tools used in different kinds of testing performed in a 
cloud environment.

• Tools for Performance Testing in the Cloud – Many of the tools are 
basically used for performance, load, stress testing. Some of these 
tools below can also be used for functional tests:
• SOASTA CloudTest
• LoadStorm
• CloudTestGo
• AppPerfect.
• Jmeter
• Cloudslueth
• CloudTestGo
• AppPerfect

• Cloud Security Testing Tools – security-related tools which are 
commonly used:
• Nessus
• Wireshark
• Nmap

54



Cloud Testing Challenges

• There are some challenges with relying on and using the cloud 
as infrastructure as well. Let’s take a look at some of the primary 
concerns while using the cloud.
• Challenge #1) With everything available on-demand to any user, 

security is a primary issue for the businesses as currently there is still a 
lot of discussion and research going on in the industry to set up 
security standards. 
User privacy protection, security standards on the cloud and the 
security of applications running in the cloud are some of the primary 
issues that need to be addressed in the cloud infrastructure. Security 
Testing techniques [1] e.g, password cracking, URL Manipulation 
Through HTTP GET Methods, SQL Injection, Cross-site Scripting (XSS)

• Challenge #2) Another big challenge is the performance of an 
application in a cloud, specifically in private clouds. It will be shared 
across many users and hence could lead to delays as well. Also in case 
of some maintenance or outage-related activities, the bandwidth may 
seem to be insufficient. 55



Cloud Testing Challenges (cont.)

• Challenge #3) Sometimes for testing purposes, it require certain 
configurations with respect to servers, storage or networking which 
may not be supported by the cloud provider. This sometimes makes it 
difficult to emulate customer environments.

• Challenge #4) with respect to integration testing whereby the testers 
test the network, database, servers, etc. In such situations, the tester 
will not have control over the underlying environment. 
Secondly, the challenge is doubled when there has to be an interaction 
between these components because the tester will have to anticipate 
risks like crashes, network breakdown or servers going kaput.

56



Takeaway

• Managed service for ease of deployment and maintenance

• Cloud service such as Amazon CloudWatch enables cloud consumers 
monitor AWS resources and applications in real time

• Perform scaling and load balancing tasks to improve an architecture

• Scaling enables you to respond quickly to changes in resource needs. 
Auto Scaling maintains application availability by automatically 
launches and releases servers in response to workload changes

• Load balancing Indicate how to distribute traffic across cloud instances

• Using the cloud for testing is immensely helping organizations to 
acquire the required tools, software licenses, infrastructures at a very 
low cost without having to set it up themselves and later worry about 
its maximum utilization.

• Nevertheless, there are challenges in cloud testing that should 
recognised by the organisation 



External References

• https://www.softwaretestinghelp.com/security-testing-of-web-
applications/#Methods_For_Web_Security_Testing

58