Chapter 3:
Cloud Platform Services

Semester1 2025/2026
By 

Assoc. Prof. Ts. Dr. Novia Admodisastro
Software Engineering & Information System Department

FSKTM, UPM



Topic Outline

• Compute services

• Storage services

• Database services

• Network and content delivery services

• Security, Identity and Compliance services

• Deployment and management services

• Other services



What are web services?

A web service is any piece of software that makes itself available 
over the internet and uses a standardized format—such as 
Extensible Markup Language (XML) or JavaScript Object Notation 
(JSON)—for the request and the response of an application 
programming interface (API) interaction.

Request message

Internet
Response message

Client Web service

3



Compute 
services Storage services Database 

services

Network and Security, Identity Deployment and 
content delivery and Compliance management 

services services services

4



Compute Services

• Compute services are also known as Infrastructure-as-a-Service 
(IaaS) describes concepts and objects related to software 
computation. 
• Compute platforms supply a virtual server instance and storage 

and APIs that let users migrate workloads to a virtual machine.
• Consumers allocate compute power and can start, stop, access, and 

configure their computer resources as desired.
• Choosing the best infrastructure depends on the application 

requirements, lifecycle, code size, demand, and computing 
needs. 
• For example, applications that run machine learning algorithms or 3D 

graphics rendering functions require many gigs of RAM and multiple 
CPUs to run successfully. In this case, the CPUs, RAM, and Graphic 
Processing Units required will be called compute resources, and the 
applications would be compute-intensive applications.

5



6



Storage Services (1/2)

• Cloud storage enables storing data and files on the internet 
through a cloud computing provider that consumers access either 
through the public internet or a dedicated private network 
connection. 
• The cloud  provider securely stores, manages, and maintains the storage 

servers, infrastructure, and network to ensure access to the data when 
needed it at virtually unlimited scale, and with elastic capacity. 

• Cloud storage removes the need to buy and manage data 
storage infrastructure
• Giving consumers agility, scalability, and durability, with any time, 

anywhere data access.
• There are three main cloud storage types: object storage, file 

storage, and block storage. 
• Each storage offers its own advantages and has its own use cases.

7



Storage Services (2/2)

• Object storage
• Organizations have to store a massive and growing amount of unstructured 

data, such as photos, videos, machine learning (ML), sensor data, audio 
files, and other types of web content, and finding scalable, efficient, and 
affordable ways to store them can be a challenge. 

• Object storage is a data storage architecture for large stores of unstructured 
data. 

• File storage
• File-based storage or file storage is widely used among applications and 

stores data in a hierarchical folder and file format. 
• Often known as a network-attached storage (NAS) server with common file 

level protocols of Server Message Block (SMB) used in Windows instances 
and Network File System (NFS) found in Linux.

• Block storage
• Stores data in the form of blocks. Each block has its own unique identifier for 

quick storage and retrieval.
• Enterprise applications like databases or enterprise resource planning (ERP) 

systems often require dedicated, low-latency storage for each host. 
• This is analogous to direct-attached storage (DAS) or a storage area network 

(SAN). 

8



Database Services

• A database is an electronically stored, systematic collection of data. It 
can contain any type of data, including words, numbers, images, videos, 
and files. 
• Classify databases according to their use case, data type, and data storage 

method.
• A cloud database typically runs on a cloud-computing platform. There 

are two standard deployment models:
• users can run databases on the cloud independently or 
• purchase access from a cloud database provider. 

• Database evolution
• Hierarchical database
• Network database
• Relational database
• Object-oriented database
• NoSQL database
• Graph Database

9



Networking and Content Delivery Services 
(1/2)
• A cloud network can be seen as a WAN with its infrastructure 

delivered by a cloud-based service
• Some or all of an organization’s network capabilities and resources are 

hosted in a public or private cloud platform and made available on 
demand. 

• These network resources can include virtual routers, firewalls, 
bandwidth, and network management software, with other tools and 
functions available as required.

• Content Delivery Services (CDN) main purpose is to reduce 
latency, or reduce the delay in communication created by a 
network's design. 
• Because of the global and complex nature of the internet, 

communication traffic between websites (servers) and their users 
(clients) has to move over large physical distances. 

• The communication is also two-way, with requests going from the client 
to the server and responses coming back.

10



Networking and Content 
Delivery Services (2/2)
• A CDN improves efficiency by introducing intermediary servers 

between the client and the website server. 
• These CDN servers manage some of the client-server communications.
• They decrease web traffic to the web server, reduce bandwidth 

consumption, and improve the user experience of the applications.
• A CDN can deliver two types of contents:

• Static content 
• website data that does not change from user to user. 
• Website header images, logos, and font styles remain the same across all users, 

and the business does not change them frequently. 
• Static data does not need to be modified, processed, or generated and is ideal for 

storage on a CDN.
• Dynamic content – 

• such as social media news feeds, weather reports, login status, and chat messages 
vary among website users. 

• this data changes based on the user's location, login time, or user preferences, and 
the website must generate the data for every user and every user interaction.

11



12



Security, Identity and Compliance Services

• Secure consumers’ workloads and applications in the cloud.
• Identity and Access Management (IAM) is a web service that helps securely 

control access to cloud resources. 
• control who is authenticated (signed in) and authorized (has permissions) to use 

resources.
• enables to securely control access to services and resources for application users, 

groups, and roles. 
• create and manage fine-grained access controls with permissions, specify who can 

access which services and resources, and under which conditions.
• Network and application protection services enable you to enforce fine-

grained security policy at network control points across your organization. 
• inspect and filter traffic to prevent unauthorized resource access at the host-, network-, 

and application-level boundaries. 
• Data protection provides services that help to protect data, accounts, and 

workloads from unauthorized access. 
• provide encryption and key management and threat detection

• Compliance provides comprehensive view of compliance status and 
continuously monitors consumer environment using automated compliance 
checks based on the best practices and industry standards.

13



Deployment and management services 
(1/1)
• There are multiple options for provisioning infrastructure and 

deploying cloud applications. 
• Whether the application architecture is a simple three-tier web 

application or a complex set of workloads. 
• Based on the nature of the application and the underlying 

services (compute, storage, database, etc.) that it requires, cloud 
services are use to create a flexible deployment solution that can 
be tailored to fit the needs of both application and organization.
• Many organizations adopt containers to ‘decompose’ monolithic 

applications into microservices, or to migrate software development and 
deployment to the cloud.

• Container deployment involves using container technologies to deploy 
applications. E.g. docker, Kubernetes, Google Kubernestes Engine (GKE), 
Amazon Elastics Container Service (ECS), Azure Container Instances, 
OpenShift Container Platform 

14



Deployment and management services 
(2/2)

Traditional Deployment Virtualisation Container

15



What is AWS?
• AWS is a secure cloud platform that offers a broad set of global cloud-

based products.
• AWS provides you with on-demand access to compute, storage, 

network, database, and other IT resources and management tools.
• AWS offers flexibility.
• You pay only for the individual services you need, for as long as you use 

them.
• AWS services work together like building blocks.

16



AWS foundational services

Applications Virtual desktops Collaboration and sharing

Databases Analytics Application Deployment and Mobile 
Cluster services management Services

Relational computing Queuing Containers Identity
Platform Real-time Orchestration DevOps tools Sync
Services NoSQL Data App Streaming Resource templates Mobile 

warehouse Transcoding
Usage tracking Analytics

Caching Data Email
workflows Monitoring and logs Notifications

Search

Compute (virtual, 
Foundation automatic scaling, and Networking Storage (object, 

Services load balancing) block, and archive)

Infrastructure Regions Availability Zones Edge locations

17



Categories of AWS services (1/2)

Analytics Application AR and VR Blockchain Business Compute
Integration Applications

Cost Customer Database Developer Tools End User Game Tech
Management Engagement Computing

Internet Machine Management and Media Services Migration and Mobile
of Things Learning Governance Transfer

Networking and Robotics Satellite Security, Identity, and Storage
Content Delivery  Compliance

18



Categories of AWS services (2/2)

Analytics Application AR and VR Blockchain Business Compute
Integration Applications

Cost Customer Database Developer Tools End User Game Tech
Management Engagement Computing

Internet Machine Management and Media Services Migration and Mobile
of Things Learning Governance Transfer

Networking and Robotics Satellite Security, Identity, and Storage
Content Delivery Compliance

Ref. Documentation - https://docs.aws.amazon.com/
19



Services and its categories

Compute services – Storage services – Management and 
• Amazon EC2 • Amazon S3 Governance services –
• AWS Lambda • Amazon S3 Glacier • AWS Trusted Advisor
• AWS Elastic Beanstalk • Amazon EFS • AWS CloudWatch
• Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling • Amazon EBS • AWS CloudTrail
• Amazon ECS • AWS Well-Architected Tool
• Amazon EKS Database services – • AWS Auto Scaling
• Amazon ECR • Amazon RDS • AWS Command Line Interface
• AWS Fargate • Amazon DynamoDB • AWS Config

• Amazon Redshift • AWS Management Console
• Amazon Aurora • AWS Organizations

Security, Identity, and 
Compliance services – Networking and Content AWS Cost Management 
• AWS IAM Delivery services – services –
• Amazon Cognito • Amazon VPC • AWS Cost & Usage 
• AWS Shield • Amazon Route 53 Report
• AWS Artifact • Amazon CloudFront • AWS Budgets
• AWS KMS • Elastic Load Balancing • AWS Cost Explorer

20



Choosing a service
• The service you select depends on your business goals and technology 

requirements.

Amazon 
VMware Cloud EC2 AWS 

on AWS Lambda

Amazon ECS ? AWS Elastic 
Beanstalk

Amazon EKS

Amazon 
AWS Fargate

AWS Outposts Lightsail

AWS Batch

21



Compute service category

AWS Compute services

Amazon EC2 Amazon EC2 Amazon Elastic Amazon EC2 
Auto Scaling Container Service Container Registry

(Amazon ECS)

AWS Elastic AWS Amazon Elastic AWS 
Beanstalk Lambda Kubernetes Service Fargate

(Amazon EKS)

22



Compute service category (example)
• Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) - to deploy a selection of on-

demand instances offering a wide array of different performance 
benefits within your AWS environment.
• Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS) - to run Docker-

enabled applications packaged as containers across a cluster of EC2 
instances
• AWS Lambda - to run your own code using only milliseconds of compute 

resource in response to event-driven triggers in serverless environment, 
you could use

23



Storage service category

AWS storage services

Amazon Simple Amazon Elastic Amazon Elastic 
Storage Service Block Store File System 

(Amazon S3) (Amazon EBS) (Amazon EFS)

Amazon Simple 
Storage Service 

Glacier

24



Storage service category (example)
• Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) redundantly stores objects 

on multiple devices across a minimum of three Availability Zones 
(clusters of discrete data centers with redundant power, networking, and 
connectivity in an AWS Region).
• Amazon FSx and Amazon Elastic File System (Amazon EFS) provide 

shared file access for applications with unstructured data such as video 
and medical images, web and rich media content, or user directories or 
large data sets.
• Block-based cloud storage solutions like Amazon Elastic Block Store 

(Amazon EBS) are provisioned with each Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud 
(Amazon EC2) compute instance and deliver the ultra-low latency 
required for high-performance workloads.

25



Database service category

AWS Database services

Amazon Relational Amazon Aurora Amazon 
Database Service Redshift

Amazon 
DynamoDB

26



27



Database service category (example)
• Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS) is a managed 

service that makes it easy to set up, operate, and scale a relational 
database in the cloud.
• Amazon Aurora is a relational database built for the cloud. As a fully 

managed service, it automates time-consuming tasks such as 
provisioning, patching, backup, recovery, failure detection, and repair.
• Amazon Neptune is a graph-oriented database that can execute more 

than 100,000 queries per second.
• Amazon Redshift is a fully managed, petabyte-scale data warehouse 

service in the cloud.
• Amazon ElastiCache is an in-memory NoSQL database that is fully 

managed, scalable, and secure. It is a popular choice for mobile apps, 
gaming, e-commerce, and other applications where frequently accessed 
data must be stored in memory.

28



Networking and content delivery service category

AWS networking 
and content delivery services

Amazon VPC Elastic Load Amazon AWS Transit 
Balancing CloudFront Gateway 

Amazon AWS Direct AWS VPN
Route 53 Connect

29



Networking and content delivery service category 
(example)
• Networking foundations

• These services offer solutions for Virtual Private Clouds (VPCs) and for linking on-
premise networks with VPCs. Amazon VPC, AWS transit gateway, and AWS private 
link provide optimized solutions to meet your networking requirements.

• Network security
• Services like AWS shield, AWS WAF, and AWS firewall manager protect your AWS 

cloud network and applications against cyber-attacks.

• Amazon CloudFront is a content delivery network (CDN) service built for high 
performance, security, and developer convenience. Amazon CloudFront use to 
do these tasks:
• Deliver data through 275+ globally dispersed points of presence (POPs) with 

automated network mapping and intelligent routing.
• Improve security with traffic encryption and access controls, and use AWS Shield 

Standard to defend against distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks at no 
additional charge.

• Customize the code you run at the AWS network edge using serverless compute 
features to balance cost, performance, and security.

• Scale automatically to deliver software, game patches, and IoT updates with high 
transfer rates.

30



Security, identity, and compliance service category

AWS security, identity, 
and compliance services

AWS Identity and Access AWS Amazon Cognito
Management (IAM) Organizations

AWS Artifact AWS Key AWS Shield
Management 

Service 

31



AWS cost management service category

AWS cost management 
services

AWS Cost and AWS Budgets AWS Cost 
Usage Report Explorer

32



Management and governance service category

AWS management and 
governance services

AWS Management AWS Config Amazon AWS Auto 
Console CloudWatch Scaling

AWS Command AWS Trusted AWS Well- AWS 
Line Interface Advisor Architected Tool CloudTrail

33



Simple solution example

Networking Compute Database Storage

AWS Cloud

Virtual Private Cloud (VPC)

Amazon 
DynamoDB

Users Amazon S3

Amazon EC2

34



Three ways to interact with AWS

AWS Management Console
Easy-to-use graphical interface

Command Line Interface (AWS CLI)
Access to services by discrete commands or scripts

Software Development Kits (SDKs)
Access services directly from your code (such as Java, Python, and 
others)

35



2

3

1

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloud9/latest/user-guide/welcome.html
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloudshell/latest/userguide/welcome.html

36



AWSA MWaSn Maganeamgenmte Cnto nCosonsleole

© 2020, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved.

37



Command Line Interface (AWS CLI)
AWS CLI

Open source tool for
interacting with AWS services

Environments
• Linux
• MacOS
• Windows aws

© 2020, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved.

38



Software Development Kits (SDKs)
AWS SDKs

JavaScript Go 

Python Node.js

PHP C++

.NET Java

Ruby IoT

© 2020, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
39



Takeaway

• Provide an overview of different cloud services i.e., compute, 
storage, database, identity and access management etc. 
• Recognize the main cloud service categories and core services in 

cloud platform services e.g., AWS.



Refers Activity 4: Hands on AWS Management Console 

41



External References

• [1] AWS Regional Services List: https://aws.amazon.com/about-
aws/global-infrastructure/regional-product-services/
• [2] AWS Cloud Products: https://aws.amazon.com/products/

42