Chapter 1:
Cloud Computing Concepts

Semester 1 2025/2026
By 
Assoc. Prof. Ts. Dr. Novia Admodisastro
Software Engineering & Information System 
Department
FSKTM, UPM



Topic Outline

• Definition of Cloud Computing 

• Cloud Benefits

• Cloud Vendors 

• Cloud Computing Related (e.g. utility, grid, virtualisation, SOA 
etc) 



Course prerequisites

• General Required Knowledge

• IT technical knowledge

• IT business knowledge

• Preferred Knowledge

• Working knowledge of distributed systems

• Familiarity with general networking concepts

• Working knowledge of multi-tier architectures

3



Section 1: Definition of Cloud Computing 
Chapter 1: Cloud Computing Concepts



IT needs to address these business 
cIBhM ISaV alndl Deevenlopegr Reelatiosns 

IT needs to address these business challenges 

D•oDinogi nmgo rme woriteh  wleistsh  less 
Reduc•e cRaepditaul ceexp ceanpdiitutarel seaxnpdeonpderiatutiorneasl and operational expenses 
expenses 
• Reducing risk 

Redu•cEinngs urrisek t he right levels of security and resiliency across all business 
Ensure the right levels of security and resiliency 

data and processes 
across all business data and processes 

• Higher quality services 
Higher quality services 

• Improve quality of services and deliver new services that help the 
Improve quality of services and deliver new services 
that help bthues binuseisnse sgs rgoroww  aanndd  rreedudcuec ceo sctos sts 

• Breakthrough agility 
Breakthrough agility 

• Increase ability to quickly deliver new services to capitalize on 
Increase ability to quickly deliver new services to capitalize 
on opporotupniptieosr twuhnileit cieosn twainhinilge  ccoostns taanidn imnagn acgoinsgts r isakn d managing risk 

Cloud computing is one choice of models to address these challenges.   

2 ClouIBdM  Incnovoatiomn Cepnteru– Dtaillans g is one choice of models t©o20 1a1 IBdM dCorrpoeratsions these challenges. 

5



CloudIBM  cISVoanmd Depveloupetr Rienlatigons delivers IT & business 
bCelonuedf ictosmputing delivers IT & business benefits 

Virtualized 
Higher utilization 

Economy of scale 
benefits Doing more with less 

Lower capital expense 
Lower operating expense 

Standardized 
Easier access 

Flexible pricing 
Reuse and share Higher quality services 

Easier to integrate 

Automated 
Faster cycle times 

Lower support costs 
Optimized utilization Breakthrough agility 

Improved compliance Reducing risk 
Optimized security 

End user experience 

3 IBM Innovation Center – Dallas © 2011 IBM Corporation6



Cloud computing definition

• National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
definition: 

“Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-
demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (for example, networks, servers, storage, applications, and 
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal 
management effort or service provider interaction.” 

7



Cloud computing defined 

• Cloud computing is the on-demand delivery of compute power, 
database, storage, applications, and other IT resources via the internet 
with pay-as-you-go pricing.
What is the cloud?

On premises Internet

Servers
Cloud services provider

Storage
Servers Storage

Databases
Databases Applications

Applications

Corp
network Internet

© 2020, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its af f iliates. All rights reserved.

8



Cloud computing defined 

•HColowud  dporoevisd eitr  owwonsr kan?d maintains the network-connected hardware 

• You provision and use what you need 

• AWS owns and maintains the network-connected hardware

• You provision and use what you need

Storage Database Business
Applicat ions

Compute Networking Internet  
& Content of Things
Delivery

Cloud is a d© 20e20, Almiazvon Weeb rSeyrvice s, aInc. nor itsd af f ili atces. Aoll rignhts rseseruved.mption model 

9



Infrastructure as software

Cloud computing enables you to stop thinking of your infrastructure as
hardware, and instead think of (and use) it as software.

10



Traditional computing 
model

• Infrastructure as hardware

• Hardware solutions:
• Require space, staff, physical 

security, planning, capital 
expenditure

• Have a long hardware 
procurement cycle

• Require you to provision 
capacity by guessing theoretical 
maximum peaks

11



Cloud computing model

• Infrastructure as software

• Software solutions:
• Are flexible
• Can change more quickly, easily, 

and cost-effectively than hardware 
solutions

• Eliminate the undifferentiated 
heavy-lifting tasks

12



Section 2: Advantages of Cloud Computing
Chapter 1: Cloud Concepts Overview



Trade capital expense for variable expense

Capital

Data center investment Pay only for the amount 
based on forecast you consume

© 2022, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 14



Massive economies of scale

Because of aggregate usage from all customers, Cloud can achieve 
higher economies of scale and pass savings on to customers.

Cloud

Economies of scale Savings

© 2022, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 15



Stop guessing capacity

Overestimated Underestimated Scaling on 
server capacity server capacity demand

© 2022, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 16



Increase speed and agility

Launch

Weeks between wanting Minutes between wanting 
resources and having resources resources and having 

resources

© 2022, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 17



Stop spending money on 
running and maintaining data centers

Investment

Running data centers Business and customers

© 2022, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 18



Go global in minutes

© 2022, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 19



Refers Activity 1: Infographics Data 
Centre

20



Cloud Data Center

• A data center is a physical room, building or facility that 
houses IT infrastructure for building, running, and delivering 
applications and services, and for storing and managing the 
data associated with those applications and services.

• Click the link here to learn more about cloud data 
centre. https://aws.amazon.com/compliance/data-center/

21



Section 3: Cloud Vendors 
Chapter 1: Cloud Computing Concepts



Worldwide market share of leading cloud 
vendors

Reference: [1]
23



Cloud vendors service comparison 

Reference: [2][3]

24



Section 4: Cloud Computing Related
Chapter 1: Cloud Computing Concepts



Grid Computing 

• Grid computing is a type of parallel and distributed system that 
enables the sharing, selection, and aggregation of geographically 
distributed "autonomous" resources dynamically at run-time 
depending on their availability, capability, performance, cost, and 
users' quality-of-service requirements. 

• Grid computing is "a form of distributed computing and parallel 
computing, whereby a 'super and virtual computer' is composed of a 
cluster of networked, loosely-coupled computers acting in concert to 
perform very large tasks." So the goal of grid computing is to divide a 
single and large task among many loosely-coupled computers. 

• Grid computing might run in a cloud computing environment. The 
main difference is that, whereas grid computing is comprised of many 
computers working together to achieve one goal, cloud computing is 
aimed to provide computing resources for independent tasks. 

26



Utility Computing 

• "Utility computing is the packaging of computing resources, such as 
computation and storage, as a metered service similar to a traditional 
public utility (such as electricity, water, natural gas, or telephone 
network). This system has the advantage of a low or no initial cost to 
acquire hardware; instead, computational resources are essentially 
rented. Customers with very large computations or a sudden peak in 
demand can also avoid the delays that would result from physically 
acquiring and assembling a large number of computers." 

27



Utility Computing (cont.)

• "Utility computing relates to the business model in which application 
infrastructure resources – hardware and/or software – are delivered. 
• While cloud computing relates to the way we design, build, deploy and run 

applications that operate in a visualized environment, sharing resources and 
boasting the ability to dynamically grow, shrink, and self-heal." 

• Utility Billing
• Subscription – magazines, newspapers 
• Resource-based
• Utility – electricity, water (usage-based)

28



Energy Savings in Cloud Computing 

• Physical systems require energy even when they are not fully utilized. 
Furthermore, this energy is turned into heat, which must be removed 
from the Data Center. Additionally, energy may be more expensive in 
some places than others. 

• Maximizing CPU usage by allowing rapid consolidation of VMs to shut 
down surplus systems results in savings on cooling. Multiple virtual 
assets can share the same physical resources to better utilize energy. 
As requirements diminish, even on an hourly basis, virtual assets can 
be consolidated allowing physical assets to be shut down. Then when 
requirements increase, physical assets can be brought online to meet 
demand. 

• Cloud computing also allows for the ability to move visualized assets 
to run on physical assets in a location where energy is cheaper (such as 
closer to a generation station) or where cooling is easier. Virtual assets 
can be quickly migrated to take advantage of changes in energy 
pricing/availability. 

29



Takeaway

• Cloud computing is the on-demand delivery of IT resources via 
the internet with pay-as-you-go pricing.

• Cloud computing enables you to think of (and use) your 
infrastructure as software.

• Almost anything you can implement with traditional IT can also 
be implemented as an AWS cloud computing service.

• There are six benefits discussed of cloud computing.
• Businesses often seek to find the best cloud solution to fit their 

unique organizational needs. A large part of this decision is 
selecting a cloud service provider and major cloud service 
providers includes Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft 
Azure and  Google Cloud Services. 

• Cloud computing is based on several other computing areas 
such as Grid Computing and Utility Computing.



Refers Quiz 1: Get Ready to Answer Questions

31



External References

• [1] https://www.statista.com/chart/18819/worldwide-market-
share-of-leading-cloud-infrastructure-service-providers/

• [2] https://blogs.vmware.com/cloudhealth/aws-vs-azure-vs-
google/

• [3] https://www.comptia.org/content/articles/cloud-types-
solutions-and-vendors

• https://blog.ahasayen.com/cloud-reference-architecture-
cra1/#:~:text=The%20Cloud%20Reference%20Architecture%20(
CRA)%20serves%20as%20a%20collection%20of,in%20mind%20
from%20day%20one.

32