Chapter 8: 
Emerging Issues in Cloud 

Computing 

Semester 1 2025/2026

By 

Assoc. Prof. Ts. Dr. Novia Admodisastro

Software Engineering & Information System Department

FSKTM, UPM



Topic Outline

• Security and privacy

• Interoperability

• Infrastructure

• Data management



Cloud Computing Challenges

3



4



Emerging Issues & Challenges in Cloud Computing—A Hybrid Approach 931

 
Table 3. Classification of issues identified in interviews with practitioners. 

Number of 
Category Codes 

occurrences 

Security & privacy Security, privacy 6 

Performance, transfer rates, IP address space, limited capability, 
Infrastructure 6 

fine-tuning hardware 

Data management Data design and management 2 

Interoperability Portability across platforms, lack of standards 10 

Legal Legal issues 4 

Economic Rent vs. buy, access to funding, cost of bandwidth 3 

Service management Service usability, service discovery 2 
Text

Quality  0 

Software engineering process, instability, design for the cloud, 
Software 10 

legacy applications 

Trust Trust 1 

Change management Change management, previous investments, perceived loss of jobs 3 

Education about the cloud, learning DevOps, lack of experience in 
Learning & education the cloud, learning curve, learning APIs, continuous learning, 10 

complexity of operations 

 
existing categories. One category from the literature re- pant stated, “there’s a total lack of open APIs that a com- 
view (namely: quality), highlighted in blue, was not as- pany could conform to.” Another participant asserts that 

5
signed any codes. even for a single provider, this seems to be a major chal- 

The practitioners we interviewed touched on issues lenge: “There does not seem to be an API architecture 
related to all the categories identified in the literature re- that Amazon says OK all our APIs should follow the 
view except for one category on Quality.  same way-they will all work like this. They all work 

On software related issues, participants discussed por- slightly differently and don’t always return the same re- 
ting legacy applications as a major challenge. As one sults in a consistent way.” Other issues under this cate- 
participant stated that “you can’t just put some software gory include moving virtual machines among different 
that’s intended to be run on a desktop and just put it in platforms, and vendor lock-in. 
the cloud and just automatically it’s easy to distribute.” On security and privacy, participants assert that secu-
Another participant asserted that “there is a lot of legacy rity and privacy are amongst the key inhibitors to adopt-
applications that will not scale well in the cloud.” Insta- ing the cloud. From a management perspective, one par-
bility of important platforms in the Cloud such as Open- ticipant states that “management is very worried about 
Stack has also been raised as a critical issue. One par- the security of the cloud.” Nonetheless, one of the par-
ticipant stated that “Sometimes [OpenStack] is just com- ticipants argued that although “privacy and security are 
pletely unstable and there’s bugs in it that would just stop big issues…, the cloud is safer. You have teams of peo-
everything.” Another participant described the platform ple dedicated to security at these big cloud providers and 
as “a moving target.” He continued: “Everything is mov- they have to conform to all sorts of regulations.” Partici-
ing. It’s not stable.” The software engineering process pants also expressed their concerns about the privacy of 
itself is being challenged by new roles such as DevOps any data stored abroad mainly due to legislation issues.  
(aka. development and operations): “We definitely iden- On infrastructure, participants raised a range of issues. 
tify as DevOps and with the stuff that we’re doing in For example, as one participant noted, performance is 
particular, seems to be a bit more ops heavy and that major issue in the cloud: “there are notable issues with 
doesn’t lend itself as well to Agile.” Other issues that shared I/O that are still kind of being worked out where a 
were raised include: integration problems, development physical server is still faster.” Another participant stated: 
versus deployment environments, and dealing with ex- “In a lot of cases it still makes far more sense to grab a 
ternal and virtual resources. stack of disks, tons of terabyte disks, and throw them into 

On interoperability, participants brought up the issue your trunk and drive to your destination, than it would to 
of the lack of standards and open APIs. As one partici- actually send it over the wire.” 

Copyright © 2012 SciRes.                                                                                 JSEA 



1. Security and privacy

• Privacy and data security are the two most concerning factors 
to cloud computing models. 
• Cloud storage of user or business data is vital and private. 
• Encryption, security hardware, and software can solve security and 

privacy problems.

• Identity theft, data breaches, malware infections, and other 
security issues on the cloud lead to a decline in user confidence 
in your applications. 
• This can lead to a heavy loss in revenue alongside stature and 

reputation. 
• In addition, dealing with cloud computing for small businesses needs 

sending and receiving a massive amount of data quickly and is 
vulnerable to data leaks.

6



Cloud Security Approaches

• Encryption (symmetric, asymmetric, hashing) & 
tokenization/obfuscation

• Cloud security alliance (cloudsecurityalliance.org)
• Best practices to ensure a secure cloud computing environment

• Mainstream Cloud security offerings: security assessment, 
secure cloud architecture design etc.

• Cloud security in mainstream vendor solutions 

• Standards, cloud security models and related patterns 

7



Security Assurance Programs

Assurance programs

© 2020, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its af f iliates. All rights reserved.

9



2. Portability and interoperability

• Operational roadblock.
• When organizations scale or expand their intangible IT ecosystems, one 

of the biggest problems with cloud computing from a logistical 
standpoint is moving from one provider or platform to another.

• Typically, when a business switches to a new platform, there is a 
lockdown period that puts a kink in the network, driving down 
productivity in the process. 

• This significant lack of flexibility results in a raft of issues with:
• Safe and fluent data migration and management
• Establishing secure and compliant networks, essentially from scratch
• Restricted user or customer access

10



Portability and interoperability (cont.)

• These glaring roadblocks have become more prevalent in 
recent years due to the increasing complexity of 
• tools
• platforms
• systems

• One of the most effective ways to counteract these tricky risks 
of cloud computing is 
• to go through relevant data and service laws in related region to 

understand application portability rights 
• working out concrete terms with potential cloud providers to prevent 

lockdown periods or service restrictions in advance.

11



Infrastructure (interoperability)

• Most research on issues and challenges with cloud computing 
recognize interoperability as a major adoption barrier because 
of the risk of a vendor lock-in.

• Amongst the many problems being discussed are:
• lack of standard interfaces and open APIs, 
• and the lack of open standards for VM formats and 
• service deployment interfaces 

• These issues result in integration difficulties between services 
obtained from different cloud providers as well as between 
cloud resources and internal legacy systems. 

12



3. Compliance & Legal Issues
• One of the risks of cloud computing is facing today is 

compliance. 

• That is an issue for anyone using backup services or storage. 
Every time a company moves data from the internal storage to 
a cloud, it is faced with being compliant with official regulations 
and laws. 

• For example, 
• Healthcare organizations in the USA have to comply with HIPAA 

(Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996),
• Public retail companies have to comply with SOX (Sarbanes-Oxley Act 

of 2002) 
• PCI DSS (Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard).
• Personal Data Protection Act 2010 (PDPA), was passed by the 

Malaysian Parliament on June 2, 2010 and came into force on 
November 15, 2013. 
• Collection & Processing, Transfer, Security, Breach Notification, Electronic Market, 

Online Privacy

• Depending on the sector and requirements, every organization 14

must ensure these standards are respected and carried out.



15



Compliance & Legal Issues (cont.)

• Laws and regulations vary widely across different regions and 
jurisdictions as to where and how data should be stored, 
processed, and used.

• For example, the European Union requires that all personal data 
be physically stored within the jurisdictions of the European 
Union. Also, compliance requirements might vary in regards to 
the disclosure of data in general and sensitive data in specific 
(e.g. financial data, health insurance records), in addition to 
variations in the regulations around transaction log- ging and 
taxation.

• Traceability of data and alterations made on it has also been 
reported as a legal concern. 

17



4. Managing multiple clouds

• Challenges facing cloud computing haven’t just been 
concentrated in one, single cloud.

• The state of multi-cloud has grown exponentially in recent 
years.
• Companies are shifting or combining public and private 

clouds and, as mentioned earlier, tech giants like Alibaba and 
Amazon are leading the way.

• The survey by Flexera shows that 89% of enterprises have a 
multi-cloud strategy. 
• Enterprises with a hybrid strategy (combining public and 

private clouds) reach 80%, 
• Organizations with a strategy of multiple public clouds or 

multiple private clouds grew slightly but stay under 10%.

18



19



External References

• https://www.datapine.com/blog/cloud-computing-risks-and-
challenges/

• Ghanam, Y., Ferreira, J., & Maurer, F. (2012). Emerging issues 
& challenges in cloud computing—a hybrid approach.

• https://vilmate.com/blog/data-management-in-cloud-
computing-best-practices-challenges-trends/

• https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/

• https://www.sealpath.com/blog/types-of-encryption-
guide/#:~:text=There%20are%20different%20types%20of,%2C
%20Asymmetric%20Encryption%2C%20and%20Hashing

20



21