Chapter 2:
Cloud Characteristics And 

Models
Semester 1 2025/2026

By 

Assoc. Prof. Ts. Dr. Novia Admodisastro

Software Engineering & Information System Department

FSKTM, UPM



Topic Outline

• Essential Characteristics 

• Deployment Models 
• Public, Private, Hybrid And Community Models 

• Service models

• Cloud Reference Architecture 

• Cloud Platforms Reference Architecture 



Section 1: Essential Characteristics 
Chapter 2: Cloud Characteristics and Models



Cloud computing essential characteristics

• National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) defines 
cloud computing as it is known today through five 
particular characteristics [1]:

1. On-demand self-service
2. Broad network access
3. Multi-tenancy and resource pooling
4. Rapid elasticity
5. Measured service

4



1.1-On demand self-service

• Cloud computing resources can be 
provisioned without human interaction from 
the service provider. 
• In other words, organisation can provision 

additional computing resources as needed 
without going through the cloud service provider. 
This can be a storage space, virtual machine 
instances, database instances, and so on.

• Organizations can use a web self-service 
portal as an interface to access their cloud 
accounts to see their cloud services, their 
usage, and also to provision and de-provision 
services as they need to.

5



1.2-Broad network access

• Cloud computing resources are available over the network and 
can be accessed by diverse customer platforms:
• High broadband communication link—such as the internet, or in the case 

of a private clouds it could be a local area network (LAN).
• Via standard mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous thin or 

thick client platforms (e.g., mobile phones, tablets, laptops, and 
workstations).

• Network bandwidth and latency are very important aspects of 
cloud computing and broad network access, because they relate 
to the quality of service (QoS) on the network. This is particularly 
important for serving time sensitive applications.

6



1.2-Broad network access

Refers Activity 2: Explore the Cloud Global Infrastructure by Cloud 
Vendors

7



Activity 2: Global Cloud Infrastructure

•  The AWS Global Cloud Infrastructure 
(https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/) is an 
example of infrastructure distribution map to shows a secure, extensive, 
and reliable cloud platform, from data centers globally. Whether you 
need to deploy your application workloads across the globe in a single 
step or you want to build and deploy specific applications closer to your 
end users with single-digit millisecond latency,  the cloud infrastructure 
is where and when you need it.

• Other Vendor Platforms also offers their services in distributed global 
infrastructure as follows:

GCP - https://cloud.google.com/about/locations#network
Microsoft Azure - https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/explore/global-

infrastructure/geographies/#overview

• Explore the map and examine important terms while you browse 
through the website. Record the terms you learn in the course Cloud 
Glossary .

8



1.3-Multi-tenancy and resource pooling

• Cloud computing resources are designed to support a multi-
tenant model. 
• Multi-tenancy allows multiple customers to share the same applications 

or the same physical infrastructure while retaining privacy and security 
over their information. 

• It’s similar to people living in an apartment building, sharing the same 
building infrastructure but they still have their own apartments and 
privacy within that infrastructure. 

• Resource pooling means that multiple customers are serviced 
from the same physical resources. Providers’ resource pool 
should be very large and flexible enough to service multiple client 
requirements and to provide for economy of scale. 
• When it comes to resource pooling, resource allocation must not 

impact performances of critical applications.

9



What is Multi-tenancy?

• Multitenancy refers to the ability of services to be offered to multiple 
user entities (tenants) in a way so that each tenant operates as logically 
isolated, while, in fact, using physically shared resources. 
• Customizations made for one tenant are contained within metadata e.g. 

Cascading Style Sheets for UI branding 
• Each tenant runs the same application code 

• Consumer applications are usually excluded from discussions of 
multitenancy . 

10



Multi-tenancy through shared middleware 
IBM ISV and Developer Relations 

• Hardware, OS and Application server layers are shared, to varying 

1dReg:r eMesu, latic-rtoesnsa unsecrys.  TDhatrao uLagyhe rS cohmarperidse Ms Sihdadrleedw Daarteab ases with 
eithHearr dswhaarer,e OdS  oanr ds Aepppalicraatiotne  stearvbelre lasy.e rs are shared, to varying degrees, across users.  

Data Layer comprises Shared Databases with either shared or separate tables. 

Presentation Business Data 

Tenant 1’s users Layer Layer Layer 

Tenant A 

Tenant 2’s users Tenant B 

Shared Tables 
App 

Tenant 3’s users 
Tenant A 

Tenant B 

Separate Tables 

Management Layer 
Directory Services Security Provisioning 

Server HW and OS Layer 
Server Hardware and OS Layers are shared across users 11

38 IBM Innovation Center – Dallas © 2011 IBM Corporation 

Metadata Layer 



1.4-Rapid elasticity

• Elasticity is a landmark of cloud computing and it implies that 
organizations can rapidly provision and de-provision any of the 
cloud computing resources. 

• Rapid provisioning and de-provisioning might apply to storage or 
virtual machines or customer applications.

• With cloud computing scalability, there is less capital 
expenditure on the cloud customer side. 
• This is because as the cloud customer needs additional computing 

resources, they can simply provision them as needed, and they are 
available right away. 

• Scalability is more planned and gradual. 
• For instance, scalability means that manufacturing organizations are 

gradually planning for more capacity and of course the cloud can handle 
that scaling up or scaling down.

12



1.5-Measured service

• Cloud computing resources usage is metered and organizations 
pay accordingly for what they have used. 
• Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and reported, providing 

transparency for both the provider and consumer of the utilized service.

• Resource utilization can be optimized by leveraging charge-per-
use capabilities. 

• This means that cloud resource usage—whether virtual server 
instances that are running or storage in the cloud—gets 
monitored, measured and reported by the cloud service provider. 

• The cost model is based on “pay for what you use”—
the payment is variable based on the actual consumption by the 
organization.

13



AWS pricing model

Three fundamental drivers of cost with AWS

Compute Storage Data transfer

• Charged per hour/second* • Charged typically per GB • Outbound is aggregated and 
charged

• Varies by instance type
• Inbound has no charge (with 

some exceptions)

*Linux only • Charged typically per GB



How do you pay for AWS?

Pay for what you use Pay less when you reserve Pay less when you use 
more and as AWS grows

15



Pay for what you use

Pay only for the services that you consume, with no large 
upfront expenses.

On premises AWS

16



Pay less when you reserve

Invest in Reserved 
Instances (RIs):
• Save up to 75 percent

• Options: EC2
• All Upfront Reserved instance

Instance (AURI) → 
largest discount

• Partial Upfront On NURI PURI AURI
Reserved Instance Demand
(PURI) → lower 
discounts

• No Upfront Payments 
Reserved Instance 
(NURI) → smaller 
discount

17



Pay less by using more

Realize volume-based discounts:

• Savings as usage increases.

• Tiered pricing for services like Amazon 
Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3), 
Amazon Elastic Block Store (Amazon 
EBS), or Amazon Elastic File System 
(Amazon EFS) → the more you use, the 
less you pay per GB.

• Multiple storage services deliver lower 
storage costs based on needs.

18



Services with no charge

Amazon VPC

Elastic Beanstalk**

Auto Scaling**

AWS CloudFormation**

AWS Identity and Access **Note: There might be 
Management (IAM) charges associated with other 

AWS services that are used 
with these services. 

19



Section 2: Deployment Models 
Chapter 2: Cloud Characteristics and Models



Cloud computing deployment models

• There are three main cloud computing deployment models, which 
represent the cloud environments that your applications can be 
deployed in:

Cloud Hybrid On-premises
(private cloud)

21



Section 3:Public, Private, Hybrid And 
Community Models 
Chapter 2: Cloud Characteristics and Models



Public Cloud (1/2)

• Public cloud describes cloud computing in the traditional 
mainstream sense, whereby resources are dynamically 
provisioned on a fine-grained, self-service basis over the Internet 
via Web applications/Web services. 
• These Web applications/Web services originate from an off-site third-

party provider who shares resources and bills on a fine-grained utility 
computing basis. 

• Public clouds are where IT activities/functions are provided "as a 
service" over the Internet, which allows access to technology- 
enabled services without knowledge of, expertise with, or control 
over the technology infrastructure that supports them. Therefore, 
public clouds are also called "external clouds". 

23



Public Cloud (2/2)

• Obtaining an instance of a cloud computing environment via a 
public cloud is easy and inexpensive because hardware, 
application, and bandwidth costs are covered by the provider. 

• Computing resources in a public cloud can be scaled to meet the 
needs of the cloud users. 

• A public cloud can use flexible pricing models. 
• No resources are wasted because the cloud users pay for what they use 

on an as- needed basis, without the requirement to invest in additional 
internal infrastructure. 

• A public cloud helps businesses shift the bulk of the costs from 
capital expenditures and IT infrastructure investment to a utility 
operating expense model. A public cloud also helps isolate the 
end-users from the complexity of IT operations and 
management. 

24



Private Cloud (1/2)

• Private cloud are neologisms that some vendors have recently 
used to describe offerings that emulate cloud computing on 
private networks. 
• These (typically virtualization automation) products claim to "deliver 

some benefits of cloud computing without the pitfalls", capitalizing on 
data security, corporate governance, and reliability concerns. 

• Private clouds are where activities and functions are provided "as 
a service" over a company's intranet. 
• Private clouds are built by an organization for its own users, and 

everything is delivered within the organization's firewall (instead of the 
Internet). 

• The private cloud owner does not share resources with any other 
companies, so multitenancy is not an issue. Therefore, private clouds are 
also called "internal clouds". 

25



Private Cloud (2/2)

• A private cloud is owned by an enterprise and can only be 
accessed by internal users. 

• A private cloud is deployed internally behind the corporate 
security firewall. 

• A private cloud is operated and maintained by either the 
enterprise's IT operations or by a 3rd party cloud service 
provider. 

• By totally owning a cloud computing environment, an enterprise 
can provide and govern computing resources (physical servers, 
application servers, storage space, applications, services, etc.) in 
an efficient, compliant, and secure manner. 
• At the same time, by using a private cloud, an enterprise can also 

achieve significant cost saving from the infrastructure's consolidation 
and virtualization. 

26



Hybrid Cloud (1/2)

• The cloud infrastructure is a composition of two or more distinct 
cloud infrastructures (private, community, or public) that remain 
unique entities, but are bound together by standardized or 
proprietary technology that enables data and application 
portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load balancing between 
clouds).

• A hybrid cloud environment consisting of multiple internal and/or 
external providers "will be typical for most enterprises". 
• By integrating multiple cloud services, users may be able to ease the 

transition to public cloud services while avoiding issues such as PCI 
compliance. 

• Hybrid clouds are where the external and internal service delivery 
methods are integrated. Rules and policies are established by the 
organization based on factors such as security needs, criticality, 
and underlying architecture so that activities and tasks are 
allocated to external or internal clouds as appropriate. 27



Hybrid Cloud (2/2)

• A hybrid cloud model is prevalent in the industry today as it helps 
enterprises achieve substantial savings from investments in the 
infrastructure required to provide resources via public clouds. 

• At the same time, a hybrid cloud also provides secure ways for 
enterprises to keep and protect sensitive data under their own 
control of private clouds. 

28



Community Cloud

• The cloud infrastructure is provisioned for exclusive use by a 
specific community of consumers from organizations that have 
shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, policy, and 
compliance considerations). 

• It may be owned, managed, and operated by one or more of the 
organizations in the community, a third party, or some 
combination of them, and it may exist on or off premises.

• Community cloud examples
• Community cloud for government sector
• Community cloud for the education sector 
• Community cloud for the healthcare sector

29



Virtual Private Cloud

• A virtual private cloud (VPC) can help quickly create an 
economical and functional computing environment and provide 
additional security measures and system management tools. 

• A VPC provides transparent connections between cloud and 
enterprise resources. 

• A VPC provides isolation within the cloud and the secure 
communication channels between remote locations. 

• A VPC provides flexible resource allocation schemas which can 
dynamically respond to changes in cloud and network resources. 

30



Amazon VPC Amazon 
VPC

• Enables you to provision 
a logically isolated 
section of the AWS 
Cloud where you can AWS Cloud
launch AWS resources in 
a virtual network that 
you define Region

• Gives you control over 
your virtual networking Availability Zone 1 Availability Zone 2
resources, including:
• Selection of IP address VPC

range
• Creation of subnets Subnet Subnet
• Configuration of route 

tables and network 
gateways

• Enables you to 
customize the network 
configuration for your 
VPC

• Enables you to use 
multiple layers of 
security

31



Public vs. Private vs. Hybrid

• Public Cloud
• Service provider lets clients access the cloud via the Internet
• Made available to the general public or a wide industry group 

• Private Cloud 
• The cloud infrastructure is used solely by the organization that owns it 
• May reside in-house or off premises 

• Hybrid Cloud 
• Composed of two or more clouds that remain unique entities but that 

can interoperate using standard or proprietary protocols 

32



Section 4: Service Models
Chapter 2: Cloud Characteristics and Models



Cloud service models

IaaS PaaS SaaS

(infrastructure as (platform as a (software as a 
a service) service) service)

More control Less control
over IT resources over IT resources

© 2022, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates. All rights reserved. 34



Software as a service (SaaS)

• Deliver software as a service over the internet, eliminating the 
need to install and run the application 

• Tenancy: the same environment can be shared among many 
customers or users. 

• Payment method: the SaaS is normally modeled as pay-as-you- 
go, which is different from traditional licensed applications. 

• Application management: the SaaS provider is responsible for 
managing the computing environment. 

• Application upgrade: the SaaS provider can upgrade the 
application or release new features seamlessly, in contrast to the 
traditional and costly software upgrade. 

35



Platform as a service (PaaS)

• PaaS delivers a computing platform and/or solution stack as a 
service, often consuming cloud infrastructure and sustaining 
cloud applications. 
• It facilitates deployment of applications without the cost and complexity 

of buying and managing the underlying hardware and software layers. 

• A computing platform describes some sort of hardware 
architecture or software framework (including application 
frameworks), that allows software to run. A PaaS delivers a 
computing platform as a service. 

36



Infrastructure as a service (IaaS)

• IaaS delivers computer infrastructure, typically a platform 
virtualization environment, as a service. 

• Utility computing relates to the business model in which 
application infrastructure resources, hardware, and/or software 
are delivered. 

• Cloud computing relates to the way we design, build, deploy, and 
run applications that operate in a visualized environment, 
sharing resources and boasting the ability to dynamically grow, 
shrink, and self-heal. 

37



SaaS vs. PaaS vs. IaaS

• SaaS delivers software (applications) as a service over the 
Internet. 

• PaaS delivers computing platform (e.g., middleware platform 
and solution stack) as a service. 

• IaaS delivers computer infrastructure (normally a virtual 
machine) as a service. 

38



SaaS vs. PaaS vs. IaaS Layers of Cloud 
CompIBuM tISVi nandg Developer Relations 

1LMN: IaaS vs. PaaS vs. SaaS: Layers of Cloud Computing  

Collaboration CRM/ERP/HR 

Business  Industry  
Processes Applications 

Software as a Service 

Middleware Web 2.0 Application 
Java 

Runtime 
Runtime 

Development 
Database Tooling 

Platform as a Service 

Data Center  
Servers Networking Storage 

Fabric 

Shared virtualized, dynamic provisioning 

Infrastructure as a Service 

32 IBM Innovation Center – Dallas © 2011 IBM Corporation 
39



SaaSIB Mv ISsV .a nPd DaevealopSer  Rvelastio.n s IaaS Layers Tradeoffs
1LMN: IaaS vs. PaaS vs. SaaS Tradeoffs 

Native Install 

High IaaS 

Middleware Patterns 

Cost 

PaaS 

Application Patterns 

SaaS 

Low 

High Flexibility Low 

40

33 IBM Innovation Center – Dallas © 2011 IBM Corporation 



Service models of cloud service platforms

41



Similarities between AWS and Traditional 
IT

Traditional, on-premises IT space AWS

Security 
Security groups

Firewalls ACLs Administrators Network ACLs IAM

Networking

Router Network pipeline Switch Elastic Load Balancing Amazon VPC

On-premises 
Compute

servers Amazon EC2 
AMI

instances

Storage and
DAS SAN NAS RDBMS

database Amazon EBS Amazon Amazon Amazon RDS
EFS S3

42



Section 5: Cloud Reference Architecture 
Chapter 2: Cloud Characteristics and Models



Refers Activity 3: Infographics CCRA

44



Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
(CCRA) (1/2)

• CCRA is a generic high-level conceptual model that is a powerful 
tool for discussing the requirements, structures, and operations 
of cloud computing.
• The model is not tied to any specific vendor products, services, or 

reference implementation, nor does it define prescriptive solutions that 
inhibit innovation. 

• It defines a set of actors, activities, and functions that can be used 
in the process of developing cloud computing architectures and relates 
to a companion cloud computing taxonomy. 

• It contains a set of views and descriptions that are the basis for 
discussing the characteristics, uses and standards for cloud computing. 

• The NIST CCRA focuses on the requirements of what cloud 
service provides, not on a design that defines a solution and its 
implementation [2]. 
• It is intended to facilitate the understanding of the operational 

intricacies in cloud computing. 
45



Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
(CCRA) (2/2)

• The reference architecture does not represent the system 
architecture of a specific cloud computing system; 
• instead, it is a tool for describing, discussing, and developing the 

system-specific architecture using a common framework of reference. 

• The design of the CCRA serves the objectives to: 
• illustrate and understand various cloud services in the context of an 

overall cloud computing conceptual model; 
• provide technical references to USG agencies and other consumers to 

understand, discuss, categorize, and compare cloud services; and 
• communicate and analyze security, interoperability, and portability 

candidate standards and reference implementations. 

• The NIST CCRA defines five major actors: cloud consumer, cloud 
provider, cloud auditor, cloud broker, and cloud carrier. 
• Each actor is an entity (a person or an organization) that participates in 

a transaction or process and/or performs tasks in cloud computing. 

46



Actors in Cloud Computing 

Actor Definition

Cloud Consumer Person or organization that maintains a business relationship 
with, and uses service from, Cloud Providers.

Cloud Provider Person, organization, or entity responsible for making a service 
available to Cloud Consumers. 

A party that can conduct independent assessment of cloud 
Cloud Auditor 

services, information system operations, performance, and 
security of the cloud implementation. 

An entity that manages the use, performance, and delivery of 
Cloud Broker cloud services, and negotiates relationships between Cloud 

Providers and Cloud Consumers 

Cloud Carrier The intermediary that provides connectivity and transport of 
cloud services from Cloud Providers to Cloud Consumers. 

47



NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap 

 

 

Actor Definition 

Cloud Consumer Person or organization that maintains a business relationship with, and 
uses service from, Cloud Providers. 

Cloud Provider Person, organization, or entity responsible for making a service available 
to Cloud Consumers.  

Cloud Auditor A party that can conduct independent assessment of cloud services, 
information system operations, performance, and security of the cloud 
implementation. 

Cloud Broker An entity that manages the use, performance, and delivery of cloud 
services, and negotiates relationships between Cloud Providers and Cloud 
Consumers. 

Cloud Carrier The intermediary that provides connectivity and transport of cloud 

Interactiosenrvisce sb froemt Cwloued Peronvi dterhs teo C lAoucd Ctoonsrusme risn.  Cloud 
 

Computing Table 1 – Actors in Cloud Computing 
 

   
 48

Figure 1 – Interactions between the Actors in Cloud Computing 
 
3.2 Cloud Consumer 
 
The cloud consumer is the ultimate stakeholder that the cloud computing service is created to 
support. A cloud consumer represents a person or organization that maintains a business 
relationship with, and uses the service from, a cloud provider. A cloud consumer browses the 

NIST SP500‐291‐v1.0  17 
 



1-Cloud Consumer

• The cloud consumer is the ultimate stakeholder that the cloud 
computing service is created to support. 

• A cloud consumer represents a person or organization that 
maintains a business relationship with, and uses the service 
from, a cloud provider. 

• A cloud consumer browses the service catalog from a cloud 
provider, requests the appropriate service, sets up service 
contracts with the cloud provider, and uses the service. 

• The cloud consumer may be billed for the service provisioned, 
and needs to arrange payments accordingly. 
• Depending on the services requested, the activities and usage scenarios 

can be different among cloud consumers, 

49



Cloud Consumer and Cloud Provider

Type Consumer Activities Provider Activities 

Installs, manages, maintains, and 
Uses application/service for 

SaaS supports the software application 
business process operations. 

on a cloud infrastructure. 

Provisions and manages cloud 
infrastructure and middleware for 

Develops, tests, deploys, and 
the platform consumers; provides 

PaaS manages applications hosted 
development, deployment, and 

in a cloud environment. 
administration tools to platform 
consumers. 

Provisions and manages the 
Creates/installs, manages, physical processing, storage, 

IaaS and monitors services for IT networking, and the hosting 
infrastructure operations. environment and cloud 

infrastructure for IaaS consumers. 

50



Example of Services Available to a Cloud 
Consumer

51



2-Cloud Provider

• A cloud provider can be a person, an organization, or an entity 
responsible for making a service available to cloud consumers. 

• A cloud provider builds the requested software/platform/ 
infrastructure services, manages the technical infrastructure 
required for providing the services, provisions the services at 
agreed-upon service levels, and protects the security and privacy 
of the services. 

• Cloud providers major activities includes Service Deployment, 
Service Orchestration, Cloud Service Management, Security and 
Privacy. 

52



2.1-Service deployment

• A cloud infrastructure may be operated in one of the following 
deployment models: 
• Public cloud 
• Private cloud
• Community cloud, or 
• Hybrid cloud. 

53



2.2-Service orchestration

• Service orchestration refers to the arrangement, coordination, and 
management of cloud infrastructure to provide different cloud services 
to meet IT and business requirements. 

• A three-layered framework is identified for a generalized cloud 
environment:
• Service layer
• Resource abstraction and control layer
• Physical resource layer

54



2.3-Cloud service management

• Cloud Service Management includes all of the service-related functions 
that are necessary for the management and operation of those services 
required by or proposed to cloud consumers. 

• Cloud service management can be described from the perspective of 
business support, provisioning and configuration, and from the 
perspective of portability and interoperability requirements. 

55



2.4-Security

• It is critical to recognize that security is cross-cutting that spans across 
all layers of the reference model, ranges from physical security to 
application security, and in general, shares the responsibility between 
cloud provider and federal cloud consumer. 
• For example, the protection of the physical resource layer requires physical 

security that denies unauthorized access to the building, facility, resource, or 
stored information. 

• Cloud providers should ensure that the facility hosting cloud services is 
secure and that their staff has proper background checks. 

• When data or application is moved to a cloud, it is important to ensure 
that the cloud offering satisfies the security requirements and enforces 
the compliance rules. 

• An independent audit should be conducted to verify the compliance with 
regulation or security policy. 

56



2.5-Privacy

• Cloud providers should protect the assured, proper, and consistent 
collection, processing, communication, use and disposition of personal 
information (PI) and personally identifiable information (PII) in the 
cloud. 
• According to the CIO Council, one of the federal government’s key business 

imperatives is to ensure the privacy of the collected personally identifiable 
information. 

• PII is the information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s 
identity, such as their name, social security number, biometric records, etc., 
alone, or when combined with other personal or identifying information that is 
linked or linkable to a specific individual, such as date and place of birth, 
mother’s maiden name, etc. 

• Though cloud computing provides a flexible solution for shared 
resources, software and information, it also poses additional privacy 
challenges to consumers using the clouds. 

57



3-Cloud Auditor

• A cloud auditor is a party that can conduct independent 
assessment of cloud services, information system operations, 
performance, and security of a cloud implementation. 

• A cloud auditor can evaluate the services provided by a cloud 
provider in terms of security controls, privacy impact, 
performance, etc. 

58



4-Cloud Broker (1/2)

• As cloud computing evolves, the integration of cloud services can 
be too complex for cloud consumers to manage. 

• A cloud consumer may request cloud services from a cloud 
broker, instead of contacting a cloud provider directly. 

• A cloud service brokerage (CSB) – an entity that manages the 
use, performance, and delivery of cloud services and negotiates 
relationships between cloud providers and cloud consumers. 

• Cloud broker provide services in three categories: 
• Service Intermediation
• Service Aggregation 
• Service Arbitrage

• e.g., Jamcracker as a Cloud Service Broker provides an option 
through which a company can choose and manage various cloud 
platforms and services [5].

59



4-Cloud Broker (2/2)

• Service Intermediation
• A cloud broker enhances a given service by improving some specific 

capability and provides the value-added service to cloud consumers. 

• Service Aggregation
• A cloud broker combines and integrates multiple services into one or 

more new services. The broker will provide data integration and ensure 
the secure data movement between cloud consumer and multiple cloud 
providers. 

• Service Arbitrage
• Service arbitrage is similar to service aggregation, with the difference in 

that the services being aggregated aren’t fixed. Service arbitrage allows 
flexible and opportunistic choices for the broker. For example, the cloud 
broker can use a credit-scoring service and select the best score from 
multiple scoring agencies. 

60



3-Cloud Carrier

• A cloud carrier acts as an intermediary that provides connectivity and 
transport of cloud services between cloud consumers and cloud providers.

• Cloud carriers provide access to consumers through network, 
telecommunication, and other access devices. 
• Integrate some of the components and features found in telecom 

networks e.g., wide area networks (WAN), virtual private networks 
(VPN), open APIs and dynamic resource allocation.

• Cloud consumers can obtain cloud services through network access 
devices, such as computers, laptops, mobile phones, mobile Internet 
devices (MIDs), etc.

• The distribution of cloud services is normally provided by network and 
telecommunication carriers or a transport agent, where a transport agent 
refers to a business organization that provides physical transport of storage 
media such as high-capacity hard drives.

• A cloud provider will set up service level agreements (SLAs) with a cloud 
carrier to provide services consistent with the level of SLAs offered to cloud 
consumers, and may require the cloud carrier to provide dedicated and 
encrypted connections between cloud consumers and cloud providers. 61



Other CCRAs

• The ISO/IEC 17789 Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
specifies the cloud computing roles, cloud computing activities, 
and the cloud computing functional components and their 
relationships [6][7]. 

• It defines four different views for the CRA:
• User View
• Functional View
• Implementation View
• Deployment View.

62



Section 6: Well Architected Framework
Chapter 2: Cloud Characteristics and Models



Well Architected Framework

• Well Architected Framework (WAF) provides recommendations 
and describes best practices to help architects, developers, 
administrators, and other cloud practitioners design and operate 
a cloud topology that's secure, efficient, resilient, high-
performing, and cost-effective.

• AWS Well Architected Framework (AWS WAF)
• A guide for designing infrastructures that are secure, high-performing, resilient and 

efficient
• A consistent approach to evaluating and implementing cloud architectures
• A way to provide best practices that were developed through lessons learned by 

reviewing customer architectures

• Google Cloud Architecture Framework  
• Provides recommendations and describes best practices to help architects, developers, 

administrators, and other cloud practitioners design and operate a cloud topology 
that's secure, efficient, resilient, high-performing, and cost-effective.

• Alibaba Cloud’s Well-Architectured Framework
• Helps cloud architects build the most secure, resilient, and efficient infrastructure 64

possible for their applications through the three pillars



Pillars of the AWS Well-Architected Framework

65



The AWS Well-Architected Tool

• Helps you review the state of your workloads and compares them to the 
latest AWS architectural best practices

• Gives you access to knowledge and best practices used by AWS 
architects, whenever you need it

• Delivers an action plan with step-by-step guidance on how to build 
better workloads for the cloud

• Provides a consistent process for you to review and measure your cloud 
architectures

66



Refers Quiz 2: Trivia AWS Global Infrastructure

67



Takeaway

• Cloud computing enables you to think of (and use) your 
infrastructure as software.

• There are three cloud service models: IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS.

• There are three cloud deployment models: public, hybrid, and 
on-premises or private cloud.

• Cloud Reference Architecture (CRA) helps to achieve the balance 
between security and governance from one side and agility and 
speed of delivery from the other side.

• To achieve this balance, a need to adopt a framework or/and 
enterprise scaffold that helps the organisation to achieve 
governance at different levels. Deploying resources using this 
framework ensures that resources you deploy in the cloud are 
secure and adhere the organisation policies.



External References

• [1] The NIST Definition of Cloud
Computing, 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/legacy/sp/nistspecialpublication800-
145.pdf

• [2] NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap, 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.500-
291r2.pdf

• [3] IBM CCRA 4.0 https://docplayer.net/967208-Cloud-computing-
reference-architecture-ccra-4-0-overview.html

• [4] https://docs.aws.amazon.com/prescriptive-guidance/latest/security-
reference-architecture/welcome.html

• [5] https://www.jamcracker.com/cloud-broker/cloud-service-brokerage-
essentials

• [6] https://www.iso.org/standard/60545.html
• [7] https://blog.ahasayen.com/cloud-reference-architecture-

cra1/#:~:text=The%20Cloud%20Reference%20Architecture%20(CRA)%20se
rves%20as%20a%20collection%20of,in%20mind%20from%20day%20one

69